# cluster-api-provider-metal3 releasing

This document details the steps to create a release for
`cluster-api-provider-metal3` aka CAPM3.

**NOTE**: Always follow
[release documentation from the main branch](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/docs/releasing.md).
Release documentation in release branches may be outdated.

## Before making a release

Things you should check before making a release:

- Check the
  [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
  for high-level process and possible follow-up actions
- Use the `./hack/verify-release.sh` script as helper to identify possible
  issues to be addressed before creating any release tags. It verifies issues
  like:
   - Verify CAPI go module is uplifted in root, `api/` and `test/` go modules and
    `cluster-api/test` module in `test/` go module. Prior art:
    [#1157](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/1157)
   - Verify controller Go modules use latest corresponding CAPI modules. Prior art:
     [#1145](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/1145)
   - Verify BMO's `apis` and `pkg/hardwareutils` dependencies are the latest. Prior
     art:
     [#1163](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/1163)
   - Uplift IPAM `api` dependency,
     [container image version](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/config/ipam/image_patch.yaml)
     , and
     [manifest resource](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/blob/main/config/ipam/kustomization.yaml)
     . Prior art:
     [#999](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/999)
   - Verify any other direct or indirect dependency is uplifted to close any
     public vulnerabilities

## Permissions

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.
Release team member gets his/her permissions via `metal3-release-team`
membership. This GitHub team has the required permissions in each repository
required to release CAPM3. Adding person to the team gives him/her the necessary
rights  in all relevant repositories in the organization. Individual persons
should not be given permissions directly.

## Process

CAPM3 uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org).

- Regular releases: `v1.x.y`
- Beta releases: `v1.x.y-beta.z`
- Release candidate releases: `v1.x.y-rc.z`

### Repository setup

Clone the repository:
`git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3`

or if using existing repository, verify your intended remote is set to
`metal3-io`: `git remote -v`. For this document, we assume it is `origin`.

- If creating a new minor branch, identify the commit you wish to create the
  branch from, and create a branch `release-1.x`:
  `git checkout <sha> -b release-1.x` and push it to remote:
  `git push origin release-1.x` to create it
- If creating a new patch release, use existing branch `release-1.x`:
  `git checkout origin/release-1.x`

### Tags

First we create a primary release tag, that triggers release note creation and
image building processes.

- Create a signed, annotated tag with: `git tag -s -a v1.x.y -m v1.x.y`
- Push the tags to the GitHub repository: `git push origin v1.x.y`

This triggers two things:

- GitHub action workflow for automated release process creates a draft release
  in GitHub repository with correct content, comparing the pushed tag to
  previous tag. Running actions are visible on the
  [Actions](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/actions)
  page, and draft release will be visible on top of the
  [Releases](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/releases)
  page.
- GH action `build-images-action` starts building release image with the release
  tag in Jenkins, and it gets pushed to Quay. Make sure the release tag is
  visible in
  [Quay tags page](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3?tab=tags).
  If the release tag build is not visible, check if the action has failed and
  retrigger as necessary.

We also need to create one or more tags for the Go modules ecosystem:

- For any subdirectory with `go.mod` in it (excluding `hack/tools` and
  `hack/fake-apiserver`), create another Git tag with directory prefix, ie.
  `git tag api/v1.x.y` and `git tag test/v1.x.y`. This enables the
  tags to be used as a Go module version for any downstream users.

  **NOTE**: Do not create annotated tags (`-a`, or implicitly via `-m` or `-s`)
  for Go modules. Release notes expects only the main tag to be annotated,
  otherwise it might create incorrect release notes. Push both of the tags to
  `origin`.

### Release notes

Next step is to clean up the release note manually. Release note has been
generated by the `release` action, do not click the `Generate release notes`
button. In case there is issue with release action, you may rerun it via
`Actions` tab, or you can `make release-notes` to get a markdown file with
the release content to be inserted.

- If release is not a beta or release candidate, check for duplicates, reverts,
  and incorrect classifications of PRs, and whatever release creation tagged to
  be manually checked.
   - For any superseded PRs (like same dependency uplifted multiple times, or
     commit revertions) that provide no value to the release, move them to
     Superseded section. This way the changes are acknowledged to be part of the
     release, but not overwhelming the important changes contained by the
     release.
- If the release you're making is not a new major release, new minor release,
  or a new patch release from the latest release branch, uncheck the box for
  latest release.
- If it is a release candidate (RC) or a beta release, tick pre-release box.
- Save the release note as a draft, and have others review it.

### Release artifacts

We need to verify all release artifacts are correctly built or generated by
the release workflow.

We can use `./hack/verify-release.sh` to check for existence of release artifacts,
which should include the following:

Git tags pushed:

- Primary release tag: `v1.x.y`
- Go module tags: `api/v1.x.y`, `test/v1.x.y`

Container images at Quay registry:

- [cluster-api-provider-metal3:v1.x.y](https://quay.io/repository/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3?tab=tags)

Files included in the release page:

- A manifest file - `infrastructure-components.yaml`
- A metadata file - `metadata.yaml`
- A cluster template - `cluster-template.yaml`
- A file containing an example of variables to set - `example_variables.rc`

### Make the release

After everything is checked out, hit the `Publish` button your GitHub draft
release!

## Post-release actions for new release branches

Some post-release actions are needed if new minor or major branch was created.

### Branch protection rules

Branch protection rules need to be applied to the new release branch. Copy the
settings after the previous release branch, with the exception of
`Required tests` selection. Required tests can only be selected after new
keywords are implemented in Jenkins JJB, and in project-infra, and have been run
at least once in the PR targeting the branch in question.

NOTE: Branch protection rules need repository `admin` rights to modify.
Organization admins and security team members can help you.

### Update README.md and build badges

Update `README.md` with release specific information, both on `main` and
in the new `release-1.x` branch as necessary.

[Example](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/949)

In the `release-1.x` branch, update the build badges in the `README.md` to point
to correct Jenkins jobs, so the build statuses of the release branch are
visible.

[Example](https://github.com/metal3-io/cluster-api-provider-metal3/pull/951)

## Additional actions outside this repository

Further additional actions are required in the Metal3 project after CAPM3
release. For that, please continue following the instructions provided in
[Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
